Nb walkthough updates (#10)
R4EPI/R4EPIs-website: content/training/R_Basics/Advanced_Functions.Rmd

library(sitrep)
library(here)
library(dplyr)
library(forcats)

linelist_cleaned <- gen_data("AJS")

```

> ### Factors and the forcats() package  

Reviewer: forcats is not a funciton, so it shouldn't have the parens after it.

```suggestion
### Factors and the *forcats* package  
```

#### Factors

Factors are a special variable class in which data are stored internally as integers, but each integer *level* has a corresponding character value *label* that is used when the data are displayed. This can be partularly helpful when running statistical models which expect numeric (e.g. 0/1) inputs.  

> *Factors are similar to labeled values of categorical variables in Stata.*  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% notice note %}}
Factors are similar to labeled values of categorical variables in Stata.
{{% /notice %}}
```

> You can read more about factors [here](https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~s133/factors.html).  

Reviewer: It's better to link to a descriptive phrase as opposed to simply the word "here" because it's much more accessible for screen readers (otherwise, the user gets a bunch of links that say "here" with random URLs) https://www.w3.org/QA/Tips/noClickHere

```suggestion
You can [read more about factors here](https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~s133/factors.html).  
```

> The package forcats provides useful tools for working with factor variables. You can read more about forcats [here](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/forcats/versions/0.4.0).  

Reviewer: It's better to use the official website as opposed to the rdocumentation page.

```suggestion
The package forcats provides useful tools for working with factor variables. You can [read more about forcats here](https://forcats.tidyverse.org/).  
```

> For example, in the automatically generated AJS dataset, the variable `sex` is a factor. In the underlying dataset the levels are F, M, and U, but we can attach longer character labels that are displayed.  

```{r}
# Use auto-generated dataset for this example
linelist_cleaned <- gen_data("AJS")

# the variable is a factor. 
class(linelist_cleaned$sex)
```
*Note: To convert use as.factor() `linelist_cleaned$sex <- as.factor(linelist_cleaned$sex)`*  

**To change the labels for a variable, use the function fct_recode() from the package forcats.**  

After providing the name of the factor give the conversion statements, separated by commas, in the format **NEW = "OLD"**. Note that everything on the right-hand side (RHS) must be a character. So, if you want to give a new label to missing values, use the special term `NA_character_`.  

> First we use fct_count() from the package forcats to see the values in the factor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we use `fct_count()` from the package forcats to see the values in the factor:
```

```{r}
# View the levels present in the variable
fct_count(linelist_cleaned$sex)
```

> Now we re-label the values using fct_recode(), also from the package forcats.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we re-label the values using `fct_recode()`, also from the package forcats.  
```

```{r}
# Re-define the labels for the factor variable (pay attention to spelling!)
linelist_cleaned$sex <- fct_recode(linelist_cleaned$sex, 
                                   Male = "M",
                                   Female = "F",
                                   Unknown = "U")

# View the levels present in the variable
fct_count(linelist_cleaned$sex)
```

> **To change the *order* of the levels, use fct_relevel()**.  

Reviewer: I would use the word "arrangement" over "order" because there is a function called `fct_reorder`, which will rearrange factor levels based on a function applied to another variable.

```suggestion
**To change the *arrangement* of the levels, use fct_relevel()**.  
```

> This will impact the *order* of the levels as displayed in graphs and tables. Give the name of the factor followed by the new order (pay attention to spelling!).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will impact the *arrangement* of the levels as displayed in graphs and tables. Give the name of the factor followed by the new arrangement (pay attention to spelling!).  
```

```{r}

> # Provide new order of levels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Provide new arrangement of levels
```

linelist_cleaned$sex <- fct_relevel(linelist_cleaned$sex, "Female", "Male", "Unknown")

> # Check order of levels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Check arrangement of levels
```

levels(linelist_cleaned$sex)
```

#### Dropping factor levels  

If a variable is already a factor, it can be difficult to remove levels that do not have any observations. These levels will continue to appear in graphs, tables, etc.  

> For example, here we look at the values present in the variable sex. We want to convert those that are "U" to proper R missing values (`NA`).

```{r}
# Convert "U" values to missing
linelist_cleaned$sex[linelist_cleaned$sex == "U"] <- NA

# see the values and counts in the factor variable sex
fct_count(linelist_cleaned$sex)
```

> > We can see that the value "U" now has a count of zero, but it is still present as a level of the factor variable and will appear in tables and graphs. To remove this level entirely we use fct_drop(), which drops unused levels from a factor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We can see that the value "U" now has a count of zero, but it is still present as a level of the factor variable and will appear in tables and graphs. To remove this level entirely we use `fct_drop()`, which drops unused levels from a factor.
```

```{r}
# Drop unused levels
linelist_cleaned$sex <- fct_drop(linelist_cleaned$sex)

# see the values and counts in the factor variable sex
fct_count(linelist_cleaned$sex)
``` 

*Note: Use the argument `only = ` to drop specific levels: `fct_drop(linelist_cleaned$sex, only = "U")`*

> ### The %in% operator  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The `%in%` operator  
```

> You can read more abouth %in% [here](http://www.datasciencemadesimple.com/in-operator-in-r/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can [read more about the `%in%` operator here](http://www.datasciencemadesimple.com/in-operator-in-r/)
```

## Joins  

The package dplyr contains functions that are used in the templates for joining ("merging") data frames. 
There are many ways to conduct a join, and it is important that you use the correct option - otherwise you risk unexpectedl losing data!

It is wise to verify any join by inspecting the joined data frames and the resulting data frame. 

> There are more reference materials on dyplr join functions [here](https://stat545.com/bit001_dplyr-cheatsheet.html) and [here](https://rpubs.com/williamsurles/293454), and the animations below can be acccessed [here](https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are more reference materials on dplyr join functions [in the cheat sheet from UBC's STAT545 course (by Jenny Bryan)](https://stat545.com/bit001_dplyr-cheatsheet.html) and [course notes from William Srules](https://rpubs.com/williamsurles/293454). 
The animations below can be accessed at https://github.com/gadenbuie/tidyexplain.
```

![](/images/inner-join.gif)

### Left join  

A left join of dataframes x and y (`left_join(x, y)`) prioritizes only the "left" dataframe (x), thus returning all rows from x with all columns from x and y. If a row in x has multiple matches in y, all combinations are returned as separate rows.  

The argument `by = ` specifies the column name in both dataframes to compare for the join (it must be spelled the same in both dataframes).   

For example, a left join occurs in the AJS template when calculating attack rate by region, where `cases` and `population_data` are joined by their variable "patient_origin". 

```{r eval=FALSE, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
cases <- count(linelist_cleaned, patient_origin) %>%   # cases for each region
  left_join(population_data, by = "patient_origin")    # merge population data 
```

![](/images/left-join.gif)

### Full join  

A full join of dataframes x and y (`full_join(x, y)`) returns all rows from x and y. If there are any rows in x not in y (or visa-versa), the missing values are NA.  
   

![](/images/full-join.gif)  

### Anti join  

> An anti join of dataframes x and y (`anti_join(x, y)`) returns the rows from dataframe x that *do not* have matching values in dataframe y. Also, only columns from x are returned. This is sometimes used to filter data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is often used to inspect which rows are unique to a dataframe. An anti join of dataframes x and y (`anti_join(x, y)`) returns the rows from dataframe x that *do not* have matching values in dataframe y. Only columns from x are returned.
```
